The Problem With Deflationary Currencies
You never know when they are in a bubble

I've been reading Matt Levine's <i> Money Stuff </i> newsletter,
and been really enjoying it.  I think it has a casual flowing
style, which makes it readable even for sometimes challenging
topics like finance.  So here's me trying to imitate that
style.

Bitcoin has been tremendously popular.  Technically, almost
anything can be popular: music, books, tv, colors.  The
popularity of bitcoin shows us one thing for sure, people
want financial alternatives.  They want to believe in a 
system besides one in which banks and governments dictate
what we do why and when.

There are a lot of problems with bitcoin. Being popular
with libertarians, not being very stable.  Losing your
money, someone else losing your money, etc.  Most of
these problems were known and understood from the outset.

I have a strong background in mathematics and computer science,
and even took a course in cryptography in my first stint at
university.  About the time that bitcoin came out, I was taking
courses in theory of computation and algorithms.  I started
to be obsessed with NP problems, I really wanted to find
a way to "cache" solutions to subproblems,
what is called "dynamic programming".

Little did I know, that about this same time, there was the early
stages of gold rush into another form mathematical problem solving,
very simple hash function inversions, without much computational
meaning.  My younger self would have been surprised to learn that
people were about to make a whole lot of money, without doing anything
particularly meaningful.

But most these problems were known from the outset.  What may
not have been anticipated, is that bitcoin would be wildly successful,
with countless copycats, and little place to go.

And this leads us to the inherent problem with deflationary currencies.
If a currency is inflationary, then you know the market cap, or amount
in circulation, is basically what people need.  It's very unlikely that
people are saving a ton extra, because that's a losing strategy.  So
you don't get a lot of giant idle stacks.  The reason why these giant
idle stacks are important, is that the bigger the stack, the more
potential fuel there is to feed into a crash.

And that's really the truth of all currencies, not just bitcoin,
even metal based currencies.  They are always ready to crash, but
the so called "deflationary" ones tend to have a lot further to fall.

So the irony is, with an inflationary currency, you know that demand for
it is organic.  People only save what they need to, because saving
extra is just not very smart.  So if it does begin to fall more rapidly,
well it may suck, but that was always part of the deal.  If you were
the one stacking an inflationary currency, then you were the sucker
to begin with.

In many ways national fiat debts have become the currency.  They have been
the worst performing yet most widely held asset for some time.  So they
do have a long way to fall.

Such falls can be arrested by suspending the conversion of a fiat
debt, back into the fiat currency, ie sovereign default.  Not that
that is the smartest way to deal with this.  But currencies always
did well when they were lean and mean.  Just enough in circulation
so that most people could access them, but not enough that anyone
would lose too much if they failed.

This particular post is not really about MMT, you can read that
100 other places and I'm sure I'll keep explaining all of that
both now and in the future.  What this post is about, is 
currency as a design problem, not solving the problem
of society->tax->money->credit->currency.

If you want to make a currency, you gotta have some form
of demand.  Initially bitcoin was like "oh this thing is
expensive to create, but anyone can create it".  This
is not a bad way to create a currency.  The problem
was that instead of inflation, for some odd reason the
currencies designers thought deflation is better for
a currency.  This goes against millenia of economic
lessons and acquired practice.  Maybe they were on
to something?

Well, I think it turns out, no, they weren't on
to anything.  The shame is that we could have a
thriving decentralized online token, which maybe
works for payments, and makes digital commerce
a whole lot more convenient.  Instead, by embracing
deflation instead of inflation, we got a ton of
hype, scams, ponzi schemes, rug pulls, crashes,
venture capital failures, etc.

Maybe we can reboot the thing, but I think if we
do, then proof of work is not the solution.  But
in either case, here we are, many of us with
bags in our hands, trying to sell them.


