Money is an Abstraction, Math is the study of quantitative abstractions
The historical importance of money is its technology

A lot of people like to say "money isn't real", or "money is just
something we made up".  Whether or not these statements are true,
they miss the point of money.  Money is a tool, with real world
effects.  It is not imaginary, but does require engagement of
the imagination.  Money is an abstraction, and abstractions
are very real, and very powerful.

The problem with studying money mathematically, is that
money is a quantitative abstraction, but it is not just
a quantitative abstraction, it is essentially qualitative
as well.

It would be nice to be able to make a computer to tell
us how money works, or to predict what happens with money,
but that is precisely the problem.  Accounting is the 
computer and money is the data this computer uses. You can never
perfectly emulate money, because it is always, by definition,
the best computer we have for tracking resources.

And so when we study money and the economy, this is what
we must respect.  Trying to model money, is like
trying to simulate a physicist working on a math problem.

We may be able to say "oh, they walked to the chalk board,
they wrote symbols, the electrons fired in their brain"
and so forth.  But the physicist is the one solving the
problem already.  Any attempt to model the physicist instead
of trying to model physics, is just a futile layer of abstraction.

What money and prices do, is try to model value, or rather, 
the saving of human labor.  See the value of money and 
exchange, is not the labor required as input, but rather
the labor which an output saves the recipient.
Incidentally, it may
be helpful to realize that money 
is the exact opposite of sex and exercise.
 Sex and exercise are things where you can't pay someone 
to do the work for you.


So how does money relate to math?

Math is the study of quantitative abstractions, meaning
numbers.  And while in advanced math, what is a number
becomes much more loose and open minded, these "unusual
numbers" (ie rings, groups, categories, etc)
still follow strict rules and relate to each other in
specific ways.

So if money is a quantitative abstration, and math is the 
study of quantiative abstrations, then what's the issue?

Well, the issue is this, money is not <i>just</i> a 
quantitative abstraction.  It is qualitative as well.

This is why different forms of money are always in
competition or tension with each other, always deciding
which one is more real, always discovering what is 
actually the best tool for the job.  And this brings
us to the issue of interest rates.

Why interest only makes sense in private, commercial
relationships.

Interest is an inducement to hold an inferior form
of money.  If you pay interest on a form of money
which is not inferior, it is not an inducement, only
a reallocation at best, or redenomination at worst.

For it to be reallocation, someone must be on the
losing end.  And specifically, the amount lost
must compare directly to the amount someone else
gains.  Otherwise, it is only partially reallocation.

Public money is necessarily the highest form of money,
and that is because it represents common consent and
collective interest.  It is possible for public money
to not exist, but if it exists, it is always on top.

What makes it public is not simply conceptual support,
but practical use.  Public interest is a non-localized,
binding constraint on any localized social endeavor.  It is
something sufficient to cause a reaction or outcry that
censors(or supports), those actions.  The constraint
is non-local, in that applies everywhere, but the
realization of this constraint is always local, ie
it is realized in a specific place.

The simplest example of a public interest is the
notion of property.  Violating property is so
offensive, that detected and permanent violations
get recorded in database with permanent effects. 

So this is where people get property wrong. Property
is not simply a private interest in controlling
a resources or a exclusive right, rather it is a
public interest in securing private reservation.
Private property is recognized and defended not
simply by the owner themselves, but by the rest of
society who support laws, institutions, and processes
to protect this private interest.

So you cannot simultaneously deny public interests,
and believe in the notion of private property, because
private property is an example of a public interest.

In this case, again, it is not sufficient for us to
say "oh, we would like this", or "I support this interest",
what makes something a public interest is the practical
ability to enforce that, not simply a shared wish or
desire to see something happen.

And this is where the interest of interest comes in.
As interest is an inducement to hold an inferior form
of money, it means there is no existing public interest
to effect whatever end that monetary relation is meant 
to effect.  If you pay interest to finance a private
enterprise, that inherently means that it is not a public
interest.

All public interests are inherently self-financing, in
that defending that interest means lower costs, rather
than higher costs. This is how public interests get
established.  It is much cheaper for us to universally
recognize property, than to try to individually defend
property at all times.  If an interest inducement is
required for something to work, then it is not inherently
self sustaining in terms of costs, it requires
recompensatory profit.

And that is the nature and purpose of commerce, to distribute
the rewards of activities with private individual benefits.
If an activity has public benefits, then it only needs
to be organized, and not financed.  The tokens do not need
to be backed, but rather people willingly forfeit private
interests, in the form of tax, because a tax is always
cheaper than the alternative without public organization.

This is not to say that all taxes are equally effective,
only that in the net, a system of taxation(an imposition
of private costs), tends to have a net benefit over a system
without any public interests.  It is also possible for
a system to begin as a net benefit, but then degrade until
it is no longer net beneficial.  Like a supersaturated
crystal solution, sometimes there may be a seed or catalyst
required to induce reorganization.

So importantly, a tax, as part of a larger system of public
interest, is a net cost-saver.  If we lived in a society
where we could not call police against trespassers, then
in such a society, private property no longer exists. At
that point all we have is territory, which makes us no
different from animals, for better or worse. And that
brings us to this larger issue what makes us human?

Civility is the foundation of humanity.

Civility is the respect for person and property, and it
is what defines humanity.  Although we have other anthropological
peculiarities and morphological features, civility, the respect
for our peers, in terms of both person and property, is what
defines humanity.

This is not to say that we always behave civilly, or that
uncivil behaviors never present advantages.  Only that the
ability to self-censor our behaviors toward our peers, has
helped us be much more successful than short-sided selfishness.

While civility is something that developed between humans
respecting other humans, it is also something we have learned
to demonstrate for nature itself, although not in the exact same
manner or degree.  We need to eat other living things, plants
at the least, and in many cases still rely on eating other animals.

But despite that, we have fostered a respect for nature and the
preservation of ecosystems and animal life.  If anything, this
is a reflection of the tremendous impact we have on the rest
of life on earth.  If we did not exercise self-restraint and
self censorship, we could easily destroy all other living things
and ourselves in the process.  By any account this is undesireable.


So if the foundations of society and public interest have
nothing to do with mathematics, how can we use mathematics?

Mathematics is very useful, if for nothing else, than the
analytical skills we develop and tools we can create.  Money
fundamentally is a computational technology, which we use
to compute and realize humanity's interests all at the
same time.  And we didn't get where we are today through
wanton abandon of any restraint or limitations.  We got
here by deliberately cultivating respect.  This is something
that is not just for the lower classes, but for all.

If we advertise for ourselves a life without compromises,
power with out restraint, profit without preservation,
we will only realize for ourselves self destruction.

And this is the power of public money and public interest.
It literally saves costs over the alternatives, that alternative
being planetary destruction.  Not to say every naive effort with
this goal in mind will be effective, only that a successful effort
will be worth it, if we can manage it.

Interest on public money is not part of the deal.

