When does the redenomination effect apply to interest rates?
basically always

A risk free interest rate is merely an exchange rate across time.
One might think that this neglects the time value of money,
but in fact, time value is an inherent part of money having
value.  Money is valued because it can be used in exchange,
and any form of exchange value can potentially be leveraged for
"time value".


The ideal form of value is something with physical value, but
zero maintenance costs or degradation.  Then its use value
is basically free.  But of course, this should be priced into
its cost.

The only other significant factor in price for such a good
would be production costs.

So in fact, when we look at money interest as an exchange rate, and
therefore a redenomination, this actually does include the
time value.  The time value is always included in the value
of money.  It's not like you get money's value plus the
time value separately.  The time value is a function of its
face value.

While time value can vary based on conditions, time value
is always factored into face value, and thus risk free
swaps of face value across time, measure the "redenomination"
of money.

<h2> The See-Saw Effect </h2>

The see-saw effect is the most accurate description of how
rate hikes work, that captures all of the dynamics.  The
see saw effect recognizes both the downward nominal
redenomination of assets based on duration, and the subsequent
upward adjustment of prices based on interest.

So if the goal is to reduce inflation today, with little regard
to its forward trajectory, then the see-saw effect can do that.

There is always some "pivot point" in the future, where a specific
rate hike today, instead of lowering the price level, begins to
increase it.  Again, as the time value of money is part of its
face value, this is unavoidable.

But what can be done is targeting a level of CPI inflation
independently from the interest redenomination.  Interest
does not specify a source of the price level, so that
gives some room for other policies to do that.

However, if your target direction for CPI inflation and
the interest based redenomination of currency are working
against each other, then you can get a lot of tension and
potential instability, as it requires ensure increased
purchasing power for savers.

When money earns a risk free rate, it is not that you 
are paid a dollar for not spending a dollar, it is that
your 10 dollars literally becomes 11 dollars.  So 10
dollars of work in the past, is now compensated with
11 dollars today.  Whether you held the money through
that period or it circulated is irrelevant, the price
level is still redenominated.  This works exactly like
a stock split.

When I think about inflation and interest, I vaguely
recall some discussion as a young boy taking place
in my grandfather's
garage around a woodstove, about interest and saving.
Whether this was a discussion between myself
and my grandfather, or him and my parents, or
one of my uncles, I cannot exactly recall, but
the topics of interest, inflation, and banking
were always not to far under the surface in 
his life as a potato farmer.

My grandpa had a saying, something along the
lines of "the accountants are the ones who
tell the lawyers what they can do." highlighting
that normally we look to the law and the lawyers
to know what is allowed, but the lawyers must
then turn around and ask the accountants.

The mechanics of accounting are straightforward,
including the accounting of interest rates.
Any universal nominal rate has a specific effect
on the distribution of purchasing power, and
there is no difference on purchasing power
between a nominal interest rate, and a deflationary
currency.

However, there is a difference once other nominal
policy variables are considered, in that interest
redenomination
triggers other automatic stabilizers and nominal
policy variables.

A risk free rate redenomination is inflation without
the erosion of savings.  So when there is inflation
as an erosion of purchasing power, we can counter
it by deliberately causing inflation as a redenomination,
such that policy automatic stabilizers "kick in"
much more rapidly, without the erosion of saved purchasing
power, which can itself create a positive feedback of
devaluation.

So it is not that rate hikes for the purpose of inflation
control are utterly senseless, no, it is merely the prioritization
of saved purchasing power over new work.  Whether this fits with
your political and social aims, is a matter of opinion, but
interest is using redenomination inflation to fight
currency devaluation inflation, essentially fighting fire with
fire.

